- Welcome back.
Your liver, very important organ,
because cancer cannot
get a hold on the body
if your liver's working well.
There's an old proverb that's found
in Proverbs 14, verse six.
It says, "knowledge is easy
to him that understands."
So what I wanna do tonight,
is I wanna give you an
understanding of your liver
because when you have an
understanding of your liver,
you actually then have the
knowledge on how to treat it.
Everything that comes into your body,
comes first to the liver.
And the liver basically
determines where everything goes.
And everything that
comes out of your body,
comes out under the
jurisdiction of the liver.
And so, I'm gonna begin with showing you,
which I already have touched on,
is what happens with everything
that comes into the liver.
Now, any environmental poisons
that come into the liver,
the liver assesses it,
and if it's really toxic,
it wraps it up in fat and stores it.
But if it can, it'll break it
down to a water soluble state
and release it.
What we also looked at
in our last lecture,
is what happens with the food.
All of this food breaks down to glucose
in the gastrointestinal tract,
and then it goes into the blood on the M1,
straight to the liver.
So, here's our liver.
And then the liver
determines where it goes.
The liver is the largest
internal organ in the body.
Your liver is the only organ
that has the ability to regenerate.
And you'll see why God made that so,
as we go through this lecture.
Your liver is called the Project Manager.
Because everything that goes into the body
goes first to the liver.
It determines what happens.
And so, as I showed you
in the last lecture,
all of this food breaks down to glucose.
The glucose goes into the blood.
And it goes straight to the liver.
It's called the portal
vein, or called the M1,
straight to the liver.
And then the liver determines.
First of all it goes to the cell.
So I'll take you through this once more.
The glucose goes into the cell,
it goes through a 20 step pathway.
Which gives us two units of energy.
End result of the 20 step pathway,
is a chemical form of
glucose called pyruvate.
Pyruvate, as the chemical form of glucose,
gets fed into the powerhouse.
Called the powerhouse because
this eight step pathway
gives us 36 units of energy.
And as I showed you, this
is the oxygen pathway.
Oxygen is what causes so much energy.
This has no oxygen,
so it's also called the anaerobic pathway.
We also looked at how the excess glucose
gets stored as glycogen.
Little bunches of grapes.
We also looked at how the
excess after that, of glucose,
is stored as fat.
Your muscle cell stores this glycogen,
the quick quick-release glucose store,
and it can only be used
by your muscle cell.
But your liver can also store glycogen.
And the liver that your
glycogen-- (laughs)
I mean the glycogen that your liver stores
it can go all over the body.
Whereas the glycogen in your muscle cell
can only be used by your muscle cell.
There's a book called "Good
Calories, Bad Calories,"
by Gary Taubes.
You might've heard of it;
it's quite a famous book.
And he shows, that back in the 1850s,
there was a man called William Banting
who was putting on weight.
And he went to a very famous
doctor, called Claude Bernard,
a French doctor,
and he took him off all starches.
It was called starches then.
We call it carbohydrates now.
So, what did he eat?
He had a lot of fiber, lot of vegetables.
He had a lot of meat,
butter, cream, cheese, eggs.
There was his protein.
And meat, butter, cream, cheese,
eggs also has a lot of fat.
That was the diet that he was
given by Dr. Claude Bernard.
The weight just fell off him.
Can you see why?
You see, when you're not giving your body
this quick-release glucose stores,
your liver can convert
protein and fat to glucose,
and your liver can turn your
fat stores into glucose.
And, as I said the other lecture,
that's called gluconeogenesis,
creating new glucose
out of the fat stores.
So, William Banting was not hungry,
because he was getting lots of energy
from that being broken down and these.
The weight was just falling off him
because his liver was
breaking down his fat stores,
'cause he wasn't delivering
the quick-release glucose.
He was never hungry because,
as you'll see tomorrow night,
these are the three food groups
that keep the food in the stomach longer.
'Cause he found the perfect diet:
never hungry, weight
falling off, lots of energy.
So, William Banting wrote a paper on it.
And it was called "The Bant."
And this paper, we'd say
today, it went "viral."
But it actually went
everywhere, this was the 1850s.
And it was said, if you were on a diet,
people would say, "are
you doing The Bant?"
Let's fast forward to the 80s.
What diet does that sound like?
Dr. Robert Atkins diet?
Do you know that his book was number one
on the New York Times' Bestselling List
four years running.
Nutritionists and doctors hated him.
Ancel Keys, who came up
with the fat and cholesterol
cause heart disease.
They hated him.
But the fact was, the people loved him.
Why?
Because what are we interested in?
Something that works.
This worked.
And Atkins' patients weren't
dying of heart attacks.
Atkins scratched his head.
Because his patients, the cancer patients,
were going into remission.
Remember we looked at, yesterday,
how fungus and cancer are closely related,
and fungus loves high glucose.
Now his patients were on a diet
that released slow, low glucose.
So, the cancer cells couldn't survive.
His patients with high cholesterol levels
came back to normal.
Did you hear that?
What are they eating?
Meat, butter, cream, cheese, eggs.
No wonder the nutritionists
and the doctors hated him.
Because he proved them all wrong.
And I would be a fool not to
acknowledge what that diet did.
Now, before you run out
of the door, hear me out.
Because I'm a vegetarian.
(laughs)
And what was Atkins?
A high meat diet.
Do you know he had the science.
And as Dr. Karl Benjamin said to me,
he said, "I used to be
one of Atkins' patients.
"And if Atkins had read the China study,"
he said, "I believe Atkins
would have become a vegetarian."
So, we're looking at his science here.
And his science was correct.
His diabetics were coming
off their medication.
This is Type I and Type II diabetes.
My last lecture showed you why that is so.
And that's why Atkins wrote his books.
And he discovered that
these three food groups
are the three essential food groups.
Do you know what "essential" means?
Body cannot make it,
you've gotta put it in.
Fiber's essential because
your gastrointestinal tract,
as you'll see tomorrow night,
it needs to be swept every day.
And the vegetables sweep that.
Most people don't realize,
on the Atkins diet,
you had to eat three
cups of vegetables a day.
One cup had to be greens.
Protein's essential
because 50% of the membrane
around every cell in the body is protein.
And 50% of the membrane
around every cell in the body is fat.
That's pretty essential.
Except for the brain cell.
Those cells are 70% fat.
The membrane around them.
The fattiest organ in
the body is the brain.
The three essential food groups.
How many Aussies, on the
high carbohydrate diet,
are missing out on the three essentials?
Now, carbohydrates aren't bad.
What a relief; we like them.
My husband would never forgive
me if the potatoes stopped.
Carbohydrates are only
bad if you overdo them
and they're refined.
Can you see that?
That's where the problem arises.
What Atkins found was that
the nonessential food group
is actually carbohydrates.
Do you know what that means?
You can live well without them.
But let me very quickly
say, I don't suggest you do.
There's no need.
You see, your carbohydrate
part of the meal
is your negotiating part of the meal.
And the negotiation's changed,
depending on your weight,
your size, your height.
My 6'6" brother-in-law
eats more carbs than I do.
But probably where the
negotiation's changed the most
is your health status.
So if someone wanted to
quickly conquer diabetes,
as I just showed you,
what would they drastically drop?
Carbs.
Someone wanted to lose weight quickly,
what would they drastically drop?
Carbs.
Someone wanted to conquer cancer,
what would they drastically drop?
Carbs.
And because it's a nonessential,
you can actually live without it.
It was in late 2016,
Catalyst did a show
called "Fat or Fiction."
I don't know if anyone here saw it.
Very interesting.
There was a professor
of nutrition on there.
He said "you can actually live very well,
"without one dot of carbohydrate."
But as I said, it's not a bad food.
And it's not a wrong food.
It's just that most people
today overdo the carbs. (laughs)
Yes, it's got nutrients.
Yes, we run on carbs.
But can you see my point?
Most people overdo it.
So, how do you do it on a vegetarian diet?
Let me show you.
Here is the food, we're
gonna look at the food part
of the meal.
We're going to look at the
protein part of the meal,
and the carbohydrate part of the the food.
Carbs.
And we're gonna go to Genesis 1:29,
and we're gonna look at what
God tells Adam and Eve to eat.
"And God said, 'behold I've
given you every herb, berry,
"and seed, which is upon
the face of the Earth.'"
So what's a seed?
A seed is a grain.
A seed is a legume.
A seed is a seed.
So what are the grains?
We've got wheat, rye, barley,
oats, amaranth, buckwheat,
quinoa, rice.
We said rice.
So many.
And they are high in protein
and high in carbohydrates.
So how many on our carbohydrate
list are from grain?
So, grain, grain, grain,
grain, grain, grain, grain.
The majority on our
high carbohydrate list,
are from grain.
What's a legume?
That's lentils, chickpeas,
lima beans, black eyed beans,
cannelloni beans, kidney
beans, so many beans.
They are high in protein.
And they are medium to
low in carbohydrate.
The fact is, they are about
a third the carbohydrate
that you will find in the grain.
Seed: pumpkin seed, sesame
seed, sunflower seed,
chia seed, flaxseed, or linseed.
High in protein, low in carbohydrates.
So, "God said, 'behold, I've
given you every herb, berry,
"and seed which is upon
the face of the Earth,
"and every tree.
"In the which of the tree
is a fruit-bearing seed."
What's a fruit-bearing seed?
That's your nuts.
All your nuts come from
the fruit of the tree.
Nuts are high in protein,
low in carbohydrate.
So we've got pecan, and
walnut, and hazelnut,
Brazil, almonds, cashews, so many nuts.
Macadamia.
To ensure you're getting
your three essentials,
my suggestion is you increase
the legume, nut, seed part
of the meal,
and to decrease the grain.
Again, when my grandsons come,
my three little grandsons
are coming to stay
at grandma's house next
week for the holidays,
they'll eat three times the grain I do.
They're growing boys.
They want cereal.
I cook them millet or oats
for porridge every morning.
Can you see that it changes?
I don't need much.
I'm just a little lady. (laughs)
How do you know when you're getting
the right amount of carbs?
Who'll tell you?
Your body will tell you.
How will it tell you?
You'll be the right weight,
you'll have lots of energy,
you sleep well.
There's your sign.
What's the old Aussie saying?
"If you're on a good thing, stick to it."
What does the Bible say
in 1 Thessalonians 5:21?
"Prove all things and hold
fast to that which is good."
In other words, if it works, do it.
That's why I do it. It works.
But most people stop the
fat because of cholesterol.
And this is a good time
to look at cholesterol
because your liver makes cholesterol.
And it makes cholesterol
according to the demands
that the body puts on it.
And 80% of the cholesterol
that your liver makes
is made from glucose.
And 20% of the cholesterol
that your liver makes
is made from fat.
Now this illustration alone shows you,
it's not the butter on the bread,
it's the bread under the
butter that's the problem.
It's not the fat.
Yes, there's a lot of
problems with butter today,
(laughs)
because of the cows that it came from.
I put olive oil on my bread.
My husband puts avocado on his bread.
In fact, most of the time
I put both on my bread.
'Cause remember fat doesn't make you fat.
So, let me show you the two
different types of cholesterol.
You've got HDL, which is
high-density lipoprotein,
and you've got LDL,
low-density lipoprotein.
HDL's role in the body
is that of a carrier.
It carries excess
cholesterol out of the blood
and back to the liver.
That's why it's called the good guy.
LDL is the repairer and the rebuilder.
Unfortunately, it's called the bad guy.
But what you've gotta remember,
is the body doesn't make anything bad.
It has a role in the body.
It has another role, and
it delivers cholesterol
to the brain.
And your brain loves cholesterol.
So let's have a look at how
these two work in the body,
particularly in the blood.
So here's your artery.
And because of its high
density, HDL's in the middle.
And because of its low
density, LDL is on the edge.
There's an interesting book
that I've read recently.
It was only written about a year ago.
It's called "Put Your
Heart in Your Mouth,"
by Dr. Natasha Campbell-McBride.
She's well known for her
gut and psychology book.
She spends about three chapters showing
that the cause of heart disease
is damage to the arterial walls.
So what damages the arterial wall?
They're the endothelial cells.
Cigarettes, there's four thousand
chemicals in a cigarette,
and those chemicals damage the artery.
The chemicals in our food,
in our cleaning products,
in our shampoos, in our
conditioners, in our moisturizers,
they're damaging the arterial wall.
Mercury.
Mercury damages the arterial wall.
It's found in fish, it's
found in the flu vaccine,
and it's found in the mercury
fillings in our mouth.
Mold.
Mold is toxic.
Mold gets into your blood,
it can cause holes in the arterial walls.
A high-wheat, high-sugar diet,
creating a lot of glucose.
That sticky glucose connects
with protein molecules,
and sticks to the wall of the arteries.
So the high-carb diet can do it.
Alcohol and high sugar just feed it.
Who's gonna plug up the holes?
Students?
The repairer and the rebuilder.
The repairer and the rebuilder comes along
and plugs up the holes.
Now, the person doesn't realize
that the mold in the
house is killing them.
They don't really believe what it says
on the packet of the cigarettes.
They don't realize that the chemicals
that they're cleaning
their bathrooms with,
that are in their food.
And so, what's happening
is the damage continues.
They don't realize that the
mercury fillings in their mouth
are damaging the walls.
So, what's happening in the arteries?
What's it called?
Atherosclerosis.
To blame cholesterol for heart disease
is like blaming the fire
trucks for the fire.
"Well, they must cause the
fire, they're always there."
It's like blaming the
ambulances for the accidents.
"Well, they must be causing them.
"They're the one common
denominator at every accident."
Can you see that theory?
Let me tell you the books
that we have at our health retreat.
One book is called "The
Great Cholesterol Deception,"
by Dr. Peter Dingle.
Another book is called "The
Great Cholesterol Con,"
by Dr. Malcolm Kendrick.
Another book, which is an e-book,
is "The Great Cholesterol
Lie," by Dr. Dwight Lundell.
He's a cardiovascular surgeon.
He's performed ten thousand bypasses.
And he's written a book,
"The Great Cholesterol Lie."
"The Great Cholesterol
Myth," by Jonny Bowden.
We've got another one called
"The Great Cholesterol Hoax,"
"101 Lies,"
We're running out of words.
Dr. Malcolm Kendrick, in his book,
"The Great Cholesterol Con,"
he says there is no proof.
We've been deceived.
So, when they increase the
cholesterol lowering medication,
which so many are on, sadly,
what does that do?
Well, what it does is it
blocks the pathway in the liver
that the liver uses to make cholesterol.
But it's the same pathway
that the liver uses
to make coenzyme Q10.
What's coenzyme Q10?
It's your heart protective enzyme.
So, someone can go on
cholesterol lowering medication,
to reduce their heart disease,
and increase their risk.
Surely that's reducing heart disease.
Has it? No.
Something else is happening.
Are you ready for the side effects
of cholesterol lowering medication?
Dementia, Alzheimer's,
memory loss, muscle wasting,
and they've just added
another one, breast cancer.
Because your sex hormones
are made from cholesterol.
So, if you're on cholesterol
lowering medication,
you can stop immediately,
there will be a side effect.
Your memory will return.
(audience laughing)
That's the only side effect.
17 cases, 17 hundred cases of Alzheimer's
are being diagnosed
every week in Australia.
Okay, so cholesterol lowering medication,
fat free diet, margarine,
surely that's reduced heart disease.
No.
Because it's a false theory.
In his research, Ancel Keys,
he had to eliminate the Maasai.
They live on blood, milk and meat.
Zero heart disease.
He had to put them out of the equation,
they don't prove his theory.
Is that true science?
Mind you, they don't live long,
because their poor gut
can't handle no fiber.
But they don't have heart disease.
We've been spun a lie, I'm
sorry to break the news to you.
Well, they've tried something else.
This is another great deception.
When I was in America, two years ago,
running a health retreat in Alabama,
we had a nutritionist do
our program, she was 69.
She was in very good nic
for her age, still working.
She said, "I have the
advantage of being trained
"in university 40 years ago."
She said, "forty years ago, we were taught
"that a cholesterol level
under 300 was perfectly safe."
Now, on Australian standards,
that would be about 7.5.
Did you hear that?
Perfectly safe.
She said, "they've dropped the levels."
In America, it's now 200.
Anyone over 200 is put on
cholesterol lowering medication.
What would that be in Australia?
Is that 5.5?
Is that true?
Anyone over 5.5 in Australia
is put on cholesterol lowering medication?
Okay, so cholesterol lowering medication,
fat free diet, they've lowered the levels,
surely that has reduced heart disease.
Has it? Not at all.
Not at all.
It's still the number one killer.
Yet, Alzheimer's come up,
mental illness has come up,
because your brain cannot
function without cholesterol.
So they set up the Framingham heart study
to prove that high cholesterol
cause heart disease.
I like this study,
because it wasn't set up by
the pharmaceutical companies,
or the dairy industries,
or the meat industries,
or the grain and cereal industries.
It's an independent study.
Little town, 30,000 people,
been done over 30 years.
Some die, more are put on.
And it's not proving that high cholesterol
cause heart disease.
They're finding that people
with low and medium cholesterol levels
are still having heart attacks.
Notice that that doesn't
reach the newspaper.
Because the pharmaceutical companies
are making a lot of money out of people
on cholesterol lowering medication.
'Cause if you're put on
cholesterol lowering medication,
how long are you told you're on it for?
Life.
But do you know what
this study is showing?
People with high cholesterol
levels don't get Alzheimer's.
Would you like me to give you
a moment's silence for that?
(audience chuckling)
Because what does your brain need?
Cholesterol.
Can't function without it.
Sorry, we're being spun a lie.
So, you can see how
important the liver is.
It makes cholesterol.
It makes cholesterol
according to the demands.
And our body need it.
Dr. Malcolm Kendrick
said "for the first time,
"normal levels of a normal,
vital, body substance,
"is being called a disease."
But what I'd like to look at now,
is what happens with everything
that comes out of your body.
And I'd like to show you what happens
at Misty Mountain Health Retreat,
when our guests fast for two days.
You see, when you fast for two days,
we serve fresh fruit and
vegetable juices every two hours.
When you fast for two
days, digestion stops.
And we're not giving
enough fuel to run on.
And so your body starts
to break down fat stores.
And something else a
little bit more sinister
is being released.
It's your fat soluble toxins
that have been stored in our
fat cells over many a year.
And your body cannot
release fat soluble toxins
in a fat soluble state.
They have to be broken down
to a water soluble state,
then they can be released.
So let me show you how this happens.
This is the symbol of
the fat soluble toxin.
Phase 1:
So our guests, on Monday,
when they're fasting,
their liver goes into
phase one of the breakdown.
In phase one, the liver
takes this fat soluble toxin,
and it breaks it down to a metabolite.
A metabolite simply means
first stage of metabolism.
This metabolite is a lot more complicated
that it originally was.
It's actually highly volatile.
This metabolite creates
a lot of free radicals.
And free radicals damage the tissues.
This metabolite can sometimes
be a hundred times more toxic
than it originally was,
especially in the breakdown of alcohol.
You might say, "well
what's the liver done?"
It's just created something
worse than it originally was.
It's process.
It's like when I clean
out my kitchen cupboards.
My kitchen looks a hundred times messier
than when I started.
It's a process.
But your liver has certain
needs at this phase.
It needs antioxidants.
Antioxidants are given a
nickname: free radical scavengers.
So what are your most potent antioxidants?
Beta carotene, that's found in your orange
and your green colored vegetables,
and vitamin C, ascorbic
acid with bioflavanoids,
and vitamin E, a fat soluble vitamin.
We have to be eating fat to
get our fat soluble vitamins.
Now, within 36 hours of
beginning a detox, a fast,
phase two kicks in.
In phase two the liver takes
this highly volatile metabolite
and it joins it together with amino acids.
The union of the amino acids
and the toxic metabolite
creates the water soluble state.
And remember, as a water soluble state,
it can be easily released out of the body.
And it's symbol is a wave in a box.
Phase three happens in
conjunction with phase two.
In phase three, your liver
takes this water soluble state
and releases it out via your urine,
releases it out via your sweat glands,
releases it out via your colon.
And that's why, at Misty
Mountain Health Retreat,
every afternoon, our
guests go in a steam sauna
and have a good sweat.
Important part of the detox.
So, what I have shown you here,
has only been known since 2002.
And what I have shown you explains why
you are better to do
two days juices a week,
or two days a fortnight,
rather than one long fast.
Because if you do, say, a ten day fast,
your liver is gonna be releasing
too many fat soluble toxins
creating too many metabolites,
and you can get quite sick.
So, at Misty Mountain Health Retreat,
we supply the antioxidants
by supplying fresh
vegetable and fruit juices
every two hours.
There's all your antioxidants.
Every second juice, we
serve a protein powder.
And this protein drink contains
protein made out of pea.
It's got little bit of coconut
cream and almond milk in it,
it's quite delicious.
Phase three requires fat.
So, every protein drink,
we put a bit of coconut cream in there
to provide the saturated fat
to keep those cells supple
to be able to do the process.
I was giving this lecture
on year in America,
and a man said "this is fascinating,
"the three phase of the liver detox."
But he said, "this is
not for your lay people."
"This is for your academics."
I said, "lay people have
livers too, you know."
(audience chuckling)
This explains why we need more protein
than any generation that
lived on the planet.
We're dealing with more
environmental poisons
than any generation.
I thank God, that he's given us a liver,
that has the ability to detoxify us
from environmental poisons.
And in Psalm 104, verse 14,
the Bible says "God gave
herbs for the service of man."
There are herbs that will specifically
heal and cleanse the liver.
And that is St. Mary's
thistle, and dandelion,
and a sweet bitter is ginger.
In my book, "Self Heal by Design,"
I have devoted a whole chapter
on the three phase of the liver detox.
But also in that chapter,
I give a list of the herbs
that are specific to help heal the liver.
Remember the liver's a recoverable organ.
And it will recover if you
give it the right conditions.
What's also contained in my book,
is a liver detox that goes over five days.
Because, remember,
cancer cannot get a hold
on the liver that's working well.
And the liver is a recoverable organ.
So, let's look after our livers.
Now, we do have time for a few questions,
if there are any questions.
(piano music)